.TH GPU-ARBITER-CONFIG 5 "June 2026" "gpu-arbiter" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
gpu\-arbiter\-config \- configuration file for gpu\-arbiter(8)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.I /etc/gpu-arbiter/config.toml
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR gpu-arbiter (8)
reads its configuration from a TOML file (by default
.IR /etc/gpu-arbiter/config.toml ,
typically rendered by deployment tooling such as Ansible). A
.B missing file is not an error
\(em it yields the built\-in defaults, so the daemon is fully usable with zero
configuration. Every key is optional; a sparse file overrides only the keys it
names and leaves the rest at their defaults.
.PP
TOML keys mirror the deployment variable names minus the
.I gpu_arbiter_
prefix.
.SH TOP-LEVEL KEYS
.TP
.B enabled
Boolean. Default
.BR true .
Master enable. When
.BR false ,
the daemon logs that it is disabled and exits cleanly (a quick disable without
touching systemd).
.TP
.B port
Integer (u16). Default
.BR 48750 .
HTTP listen port, bound on 0.0.0.0 and LAN\-restricted by firewalld.
.TP
.B managed_units
Array of tables. Default: synthesized from
.B ollama_unit
/
.B eager_ollama
(a single entry). The ordered list of systemd units the arbiter evicts from the
GPU on a game launch and restores when gaming ends; eviction runs in array
order. See
.B MANAGED UNIT FIELDS
below.
.TP
.B ollama_unit
String. Default
.BR """ollama.service""" .
.B Legacy
single managed unit, used only when
.B managed_units
is unset (then synthesized into a one\-element list with
.BR "vram_match = ""ollama""" " and " "kind = ""ollama""" ).
.TP
.B eager_ollama
Boolean. Default
.BR true .
.B Legacy
restart\-on\-gaming\-end toggle for the synthesized single unit.
.TP
.B eviction_timeout_s
Integer (seconds). Default
.BR 5 .
How long to wait for a graceful teardown (VRAM drop below
.BR vram_free_threshold_mb )
before escalating to SIGKILL.
.TP
.B vram_free_threshold_mb
Integer (MiB). Default
.BR 2000 .
VRAM\-used strictly below this value means the GPU is considered "freed" after
eviction.
.TP
.B reconcile_interval_s
Integer (seconds). Default
.BR 30 .
Slow backstop reconcile interval. Detection itself is event\-driven (cn_proc);
this only covers dropped events.
.TP
.B detect_steam
Boolean. Default
.BR true .
Match
.I "SteamLaunch AppId="
in exec'd cmdlines (covers all Steam games via a
.I steam:<appid>
claim).
.TP
.B game_patterns
Array of tables. Default empty. Cmdline\-substring patterns for non\-Steam
launchers. Each entry has:
.RS
.TP
.B name
String. Human\-readable claim name (becomes
.IR pattern:<name> ).
.TP
.B match
String. Substring matched against a process cmdline.
.RE
.TP
.B vram_heuristic
Boolean. Default
.BR false .
Opt\-in: treat heavy, non\-allowlisted
.B graphics
GPU processes as games. (It cannot see Ollama, which is a compute process.)
.TP
.B vram_game_threshold_mb
Integer (MiB). Default
.BR 4000 .
VRAM threshold for the opt\-in
.B vram_heuristic.
.TP
.B gpu_allowlist
Array of strings. Default
.BR "[""ollama"", ""kwin_wayland"", ""plasmashell"", ""Xwayland""]" .
Sanctioned GPU tenants, used by the heuristic (and a sanity log line) to avoid
flagging known\-good processes as games.
.TP
.B gpu_backend
String. Default
.BR """auto""" .
Selects the GPU backend used to read VRAM and (on NVIDIA) per\-process compute
usage. One of
.BR """auto""" ,
.BR """nvidia""" ,
or
.BR """amd""" .
.B auto
probes for
.B nvidia-smi
on
.I PATH
and uses the NVIDIA backend if present, otherwise falls back to the AMD
.I amdgpu
sysfs backend
.RI ( /sys/class/drm/card*/device/mem_info_vram_* ),
and finally to NVIDIA if neither can be detected.
.B nvidia
and
.B amd
force the respective backend. On AMD there is no per\-process VRAM via sysfs, so
the opt\-in VRAM heuristic and per\-unit
.I /status
VRAM attribution degrade to empty (never an error); eviction itself is identical.
.TP
.B presence_detection
Boolean. Default
.BR true .
Watch
.B physical
human\-input devices (keyboard/mouse/gamepad) to report local at\-desk presence in
.I /status
and
.IR /metrics .
Virtual devices injected by Moonlight/Sunshine streaming are excluded by sysfs
parentage. When
.BR false ,
presence is not tracked and reported as unknown.
.TP
.B presence_idle_threshold_s
Integer (seconds). Default
.BR 600 .
Physical\-input silence after which local presence is reported as absent
.RB ( local_present " = 0)."
.SH MANAGED UNIT FIELDS
Each
.B [[managed_units]]
table accepts:
.TP
.B unit
String,
.BR required .
By default the systemd unit the daemon exclusively owns (kept
.I disabled
so systemd never races the daemon). When the
.B *_cmd
overrides below are set, this is instead a
.B free\-form label
for the tenant \(em not necessarily a systemd unit \(em used in
.I /status
and log lines.
.TP
.B eager_restart
Boolean. Default
.BR true .
Restart this unit when gaming ends (eager warm\-up).
.TP
.B stop_cmd
String or array of strings. Default: none. Override for stopping/evicting the
tenant. When unset, the daemon runs
.BR "systemctl stop <unit>" .
.TP
.B start_cmd
String or array of strings. Default: none. Override for starting the tenant.
When unset, the daemon runs
.BR "systemctl start <unit>" .
.TP
.B is_active_cmd
String or array of strings. Default: none. Override for the liveness check; its
.B exit 0 means running.
When unset, the daemon runs
.BR "systemctl is-active <unit>" .
.TP
.B kill_cmd
String or array of strings. Default: none. Override for the SIGKILL escalation
step. When unset off systemd it re\-runs
.B stop_cmd
as a best\-effort second teardown; under systemd the escalation is
.BR "systemctl kill -s SIGKILL <unit>" .
.PP
The
.B *_cmd
overrides let the daemon drive a tenant on a host without systemd (OpenRC,
runit, or plain processes). Like
.BR introspect_cmd ,
each command is
.B shell\-free
\(em an explicit argv split on whitespace and spawned directly (never
.BR "sh -c" ),
so a unit name or path cannot inject. An argument that contains a space cannot
be represented. When
.B all
.B *_cmd
are unset for a unit it is systemd\-driven exactly as before.
.TP
.B vram_match
String. Default: none. Substring matched case\-insensitively against
.B nvidia-smi
compute\-process names to attribute this unit's VRAM in
.IR /status .
When unset, no VRAM figure is reported for the unit (the field is omitted, not
reported as 0).
.TP
.B kind
String. Default: none. Introspection backend selector for the
.I /status
.B models[]
list. The only recognized value is
.BR """ollama""" ,
which runs
.B "ollama ps"
and parses its table for loaded model names. Any other non\-empty value reports
.B no
models and
.B suppresses
the name\-based back\-compat heuristic below: an explicit non\-Ollama
.B kind
is taken as "this tenant is not Ollama", so e.g.\&
.B "kind = ""vllm"""
on a unit named
.I ollama.service
will
.B not
run
.BR "ollama ps" .
The back\-compat heuristic applies
.B only
when
.B kind
is unset
.B and
.B introspect_cmd
is unset: a
.B unit
name containing
.I ollama
(case\-insensitive) is then treated as
.BR """ollama""" .
.B kind
is bypassed entirely when
.B introspect_cmd
is non\-blank \(em the precedence short\-circuits at
.B introspect_cmd
and never evaluates
.BR kind .
.TP
.B introspect_cmd
String. Default: none. An explicit command whose standard output lists the
unit's loaded model/process names \(em
.B one name per line,
each trimmed, with empty lines dropped. The string is split on whitespace into
an
.B argv
and run
.B shell\-free
(no shell, no quoting, no globbing, no variable expansion): the first token is
the program, the rest are arguments.
.B Warning:
because parsing is plain whitespace splitting with no quoting, an argument that
.B contains a space cannot be represented
\(em a path such as
.I "/path/with spaces/file"
is split into the two separate tokens
.I /path/with
and
.I spaces/file
and the command will fail. Do not use embedded spaces in the program path or any
argument.
.PP
When set to a non\-blank value within the length limit, it
.B takes precedence
over
.B kind
and the name heuristic. A
.B blank, whitespace\-only, or over\-length
value (longer than
.B 1024
bytes) is treated as
.B unset
and falls through to the next precedence level
.RB ( kind ,
then the name heuristic). The 1024\-byte cap is a footgun guard against an
operator typo overrunning the OS argv limit; a real command is far shorter.
Best\-effort: a missing binary, a non\-zero exit, an empty argv, or a query timeout
yields no models (never an error). The command is
.B bounded to 10 seconds
(the shared
.I SYSTEMCTL_TIMEOUT );
a custom introspection command that runs longer is killed and silently yields an
empty list, so keep it fast.
.SH INTROSPECTION RESOLUTION
For each managed unit, the
.B models[]
backend is resolved purely, taking the
.B first
matching rule in this order:
.IP 1. 4
.B introspect_cmd
is set and non\-blank \(rA run that argv, one name per stdout line.
.RB ( A
blank/whitespace\-only value does
.B not
match here; it is treated as unset and resolution continues.)
.IP 2. 4
else
.B kind
==
.B """ollama"""
\(rA run
.BR "ollama ps" .
.IP 3. 4
else
.B kind
is set to any
.B other
(non\-"ollama") value \(rA report
.B no
models. An explicit non\-Ollama
.B kind
.B suppresses
the name heuristic in step 4, even for a unit named
.IR ollama.service .
.IP 4. 4
else
.RB ( kind
unset
.B and
.B introspect_cmd
unset) \(rA name heuristic: if the
.B unit
name contains
.I ollama
(case\-insensitive), run
.BR "ollama ps" ;
otherwise report no models.
.PP
This preserves the original Ollama behavior as the default for an
Ollama\-kinded or Ollama\-named unit (steps 2 and 4), while letting any other
tenant report a model/process list via
.B introspect_cmd
(step 1) and letting an explicit non\-Ollama
.B kind
opt out of Ollama introspection entirely (step 3).
.SH EXAMPLES
A two\-tenant config where Ollama and a vLLM server both yield to gaming, the
vLLM server reporting its own loaded\-model list via an explicit command:
.PP
.RS
.nf
port = 48750

[[managed_units]]
unit = "ollama.service"
eager_restart = true
vram_match = "ollama"
kind = "ollama"

[[managed_units]]
unit = "vllm.service"
eager_restart = true
vram_match = "vllm"
introspect_cmd = "vllm-cli list-models"

[[game_patterns]]
name = "heroic"
match = "Heroic"
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR gpu-arbiter (8)
