.TH GPU-ARBITER 8 "June 2026" "gpu-arbiter" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
gpu\-arbiter \- gaming\-first GPU arbiter daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gpu\-arbiter
.RB [ \-\-config | \-c
.IR PATH ]
.RB [ \-\-check\-config ]
.br
.B gpu\-arbiter status
.RB [ \-\-config | \-c
.IR PATH ]
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.br
.B gpu\-arbiter
.RB [ \-\-version | \-V ]
.RB [ \-\-help | \-h ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B gpu\-arbiter
is a Linux root daemon for a workstation that is a
.B gaming PC first, AI workstation second.
It detects game launches and instantly evicts the configured GPU compute tenants
(Ollama by default, plus any managed unit) from the GPU so the game has the card
to itself, then restores those tenants when gaming ends. Tenants are driven
through systemd by default, or through per\-unit command overrides on hosts
without systemd (see
.BR gpu-arbiter-config (5)).
An HTTP
.B /status
endpoint lets other machines tell whether the box is currently free for AI work.
.PP
Run with no subcommand, the daemon takes
.B no required arguments
beyond the optional config\-path flags below. It reads all of its settings from a
TOML config file (see
.BR gpu-arbiter-config (5) );
a missing file yields built\-in defaults, so the daemon is usable with zero
configuration. The
.B status
subcommand and the
.B \-\-check\-config
flag are additive helpers that do not change the existing systemd\-unit\-driven
deployment.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-config ", " \-c " " \fIPATH\fR
Path to the TOML config file. Precedence, highest first:
.BR \-\-config / \-c ,
then the
.B GPU_ARBITER_CONFIG
environment variable, then the default
.IR /etc/gpu-arbiter/config.toml .
A missing file is not an error \(em the daemon falls back to built\-in defaults.
Applies both to the daemon and to the
.B status
subcommand (which reads it only for the port). See
.BR gpu-arbiter-config (5).
.TP
.B \-\-check\-config
Load and validate the resolved config, print
.BI "OK: " <path>
(or the typed validation error) and exit 0 on success / 1 on error, without
starting the daemon. Cross\-platform \(em works on the non\-Linux stub build.
.TP
.BR status " [" \-\-json ]
Query a running daemon: read the config for the port, issue
.B "GET http://127.0.0.1:<port>/status"
and print a human\-readable summary.
.B \-\-json
prints the raw
.I /status
JSON instead. A plain localhost HTTP client (no TLS), so it runs on any host that
can reach the port \(em including the non\-Linux stub build.
.TP
.BR \-\-version ", " \-V
Print the program name and version (the
.B CARGO_PKG_VERSION
baked from the git tag at release build time) to standard output and exit 0.
Handled before any runtime setup, so it works even on the non\-Linux stub build.
.TP
.BR \-\-help ", " \-h
Print a short usage summary \(em including the config path and the available
subcommands \(em to standard output and exit 0.
.SH DETECTION AND EVICTION MODEL
Control is
.B level\-triggered reconciliation
(the Kubernetes controller pattern): a reconcile pass observes ground truth (a
.I /proc
scan plus, optionally, the GPU's compute processes), recomputes the set of game
"claims", and drives the managed units accordingly. State is never
delta\-maintained, so it self\-heals across crashes, restarts, and dropped events.
.PP
Reconcile passes are driven by three sources:
.TP
.B cn_proc events
The kernel process\-event connector (netlink) reports fork/exec/exit. A launch
fires a debounced reconcile within milliseconds. Locally launched and
Moonlight\-streamed games are both just local processes, so both are detected.
.TP
.B A periodic backstop timer
A slow interval (default 30 s) reconciles regardless, covering any dropped
netlink events.
.TP
.B Startup
A synchronous reconcile runs before anything else can drive the managed units,
so a daemon restart or host boot never starts a GPU tenant into a live game.
.PP
Detection rules: every Steam game runs under
.I "reaper SteamLaunch AppId=<id>"
and yields a
.I steam:<appid>
claim (zero config, covers all Steam games). Non\-Steam launchers are matched by
configured cmdline substrings
.RI ( game_patterns ).
An opt\-in VRAM heuristic can additionally flag heavy, non\-allowlisted
.B graphics
GPU processes as games.
.PP
Eviction of each managed unit runs the same bounded loop, in the configured
order: stop the unit via its supervisor
.RB ( systemctl " stop, or the per-unit " stop_cmd " override),"
then poll the GPU backend
.RB ( nvidia-smi " or the " amdgpu " sysfs reader, per " gpu_backend )
until VRAM\-used drops below the free threshold (graceful release) or the
eviction timeout elapses. On timeout, if the unit is already inactive its VRAM
is already released and the release is treated as graceful; otherwise the unit
is force\-killed via its supervisor
.RB ( "systemctl kill -s SIGKILL" ", or the per-unit " kill_cmd )
and the daemon proceeds regardless \(em gaming wins the GPU unconditionally and a
game launch must never hang waiting on a tenant.
.SH HTTP CONTROL SURFACE
A single HTTP port (default 48750) is bound on 0.0.0.0 and restricted to the LAN
by a firewalld rich rule. The override endpoints under
.I /units/*
(and the
.I /ollama/*
back\-compat alias) are additionally localhost\-only.
.TP
.B GET /status
Full state snapshot: overall state
.RI ( gaming " | " available " | " evicting ),
active claims, a per\-managed\-unit array (running flag, reported
.B models[]
list, attributed VRAM), an
.I ollama
back\-compat alias block, and total GPU memory.
.TP
.B GET /metrics
Prometheus text\-format exposition.
.TP
.B GET /healthz
Liveness probe.
.TP
.B "POST /units/{unit}/start, /units/{unit}/stop"
Manual override for debugging.
.I {unit}
must be one of the configured managed units; an unknown unit is rejected with
404. Localhost\-only.
.TP
.B "POST /ollama/start, /ollama/stop"
Back\-compat alias for the first managed unit. Localhost\-only.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/gpu-arbiter/config.toml
Daemon configuration. Missing file \(rA built\-in defaults. See
.BR gpu-arbiter-config (5).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B RUST_LOG
Tracing/log filter (e.g.\&
.IR info ", " debug ).
Defaults to
.I info
when unset.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Normal: informational flag handled, or
.B enabled = false
in config (the daemon logs and exits cleanly).
.TP
.B 1
Run as the daemon on a non\-Linux host (it requires the cn_proc netlink
connector and
.IR /proc ,
plus a GPU backend \(em
.B nvidia-smi
or the
.B amdgpu
sysfs reader \(em and a unit supervisor:
.B systemctl
or the per\-unit
.B *_cmd
overrides). Also returned by
.B \-\-check\-config
on an invalid config, and by
.B status
when the running daemon cannot be reached.
.PP
SIGTERM (systemd stop) and SIGINT (Ctrl\-C) trigger a graceful shutdown.
.SH NOTES
The daemon runs only on Linux. The crate still builds and unit\-tests on any host
(including macOS) via a library/stub split; the pure decision logic is
cross\-platform and tested with literal inputs.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR gpu-arbiter-config (5),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR nvidia-smi (1)
