.TH GPU-ARBITER 1 "June 2026" "gpu-arbiter" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
gpu\-arbiter \- gaming\-first GPU arbiter daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gpu\-arbiter
.RB [ \-\-version | \-V ]
.RB [ \-\-help | \-h ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B gpu\-arbiter
is a Linux root daemon for a workstation that is a
.B gaming PC first, AI workstation second.
It detects game launches and instantly evicts GPU tenants (such as Ollama and
other managed systemd units) from the GPU so the game has the card to itself,
then restores those tenants when gaming ends. An HTTP
.B /status
endpoint lets other machines tell whether the box is currently free for AI work.
.PP
The daemon takes
.B no runtime arguments
beyond the informational flags below. It reads all of its settings from a TOML
config file (see
.BR gpu-arbiter-config (5) );
a missing file yields built\-in defaults, so the daemon is usable with zero
configuration.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-version ", " \-V
Print the program name and version (the
.B CARGO_PKG_VERSION
baked from the git tag at release build time) to standard output and exit 0.
Handled before any runtime setup, so it works even on the non\-Linux stub build.
.TP
.BR \-\-help ", " \-h
Print a short usage summary \(em including the config path and the fact that the
daemon takes no runtime arguments \(em to standard output and exit 0.
.SH DETECTION AND EVICTION MODEL
Control is
.B level\-triggered reconciliation
(the Kubernetes controller pattern): a reconcile pass observes ground truth (a
.I /proc
scan plus, optionally, the GPU's compute processes), recomputes the set of game
"claims", and drives the managed units accordingly. State is never
delta\-maintained, so it self\-heals across crashes, restarts, and dropped events.
.PP
Reconcile passes are driven by three sources:
.TP
.B cn_proc events
The kernel process\-event connector (netlink) reports fork/exec/exit. A launch
fires a debounced reconcile within milliseconds. Locally launched and
Moonlight\-streamed games are both just local processes, so both are detected.
.TP
.B A periodic backstop timer
A slow interval (default 30 s) reconciles regardless, covering any dropped
netlink events.
.TP
.B Startup
A synchronous reconcile runs before anything else can drive the managed units,
so a daemon restart or host boot never starts a GPU tenant into a live game.
.PP
Detection rules: every Steam game runs under
.I "reaper SteamLaunch AppId=<id>"
and yields a
.I steam:<appid>
claim (zero config, covers all Steam games). Non\-Steam launchers are matched by
configured cmdline substrings
.RI ( game_patterns ).
An opt\-in VRAM heuristic can additionally flag heavy, non\-allowlisted
.B graphics
GPU processes as games.
.PP
Eviction of each managed unit runs the same bounded loop, in the configured
order:
.B systemctl stop
the unit, then poll
.B nvidia-smi
until VRAM\-used drops below the free threshold (graceful release) or the
eviction timeout elapses. On timeout, if the unit is already inactive its VRAM
is already released and the release is treated as graceful; otherwise the unit
is force\-killed with
.B "systemctl kill -s SIGKILL"
and the daemon proceeds regardless \(em gaming wins the GPU unconditionally and a
game launch must never hang waiting on a tenant.
.SH HTTP CONTROL SURFACE
A single HTTP port (default 48750) is bound on 0.0.0.0 and restricted to the LAN
by a firewalld rich rule. The override endpoints under
.I /units/*
(and the
.I /ollama/*
back\-compat alias) are additionally localhost\-only.
.TP
.B GET /status
Full state snapshot: overall state
.RI ( gaming " | " available " | " evicting ),
active claims, a per\-managed\-unit array (running flag, reported
.B models[]
list, attributed VRAM), an
.I ollama
back\-compat alias block, and total GPU memory.
.TP
.B GET /metrics
Prometheus text\-format exposition.
.TP
.B GET /healthz
Liveness probe.
.TP
.B "POST /units/{unit}/start, /units/{unit}/stop"
Manual override for debugging.
.I {unit}
must be one of the configured managed units; an unknown unit is rejected with
404. Localhost\-only.
.TP
.B "POST /ollama/start, /ollama/stop"
Back\-compat alias for the first managed unit. Localhost\-only.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/gpu-arbiter/config.toml
Daemon configuration. Missing file \(rA built\-in defaults. See
.BR gpu-arbiter-config (5).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B RUST_LOG
Tracing/log filter (e.g.\&
.IR info ", " debug ).
Defaults to
.I info
when unset.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Normal: informational flag handled, or
.B enabled = false
in config (the daemon logs and exits cleanly).
.TP
.B 1
Run on a non\-Linux host (the daemon requires the cn_proc netlink connector,
.IR /proc ", " nvidia-smi ", and " systemctl ).
.PP
SIGTERM (systemd stop) and SIGINT (Ctrl\-C) trigger a graceful shutdown.
.SH NOTES
The daemon runs only on Linux. The crate still builds and unit\-tests on any host
(including macOS) via a library/stub split; the pure decision logic is
cross\-platform and tested with literal inputs.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR gpu-arbiter-config (5),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR nvidia-smi (1)
